Update release notes for 2024.04.0+736.pro1 (#14605)
rstudio/rstudio: docs/news/index.qmd

This page provides the release notes associated with each release of RStudio and Posit Workbench. Please contact customer support (<a href="mailto:support@posit.co">support@posit.co</a>) for questions about the described changes.

## RStudio 2024.04.0

**"Chocolate Cosmos"**

>Date: 2024-04-29

### New

#### RStudio

- RStudio now requires R 3.6.0 or newer. (#14210)

> - RStudio's auto-completion system now supports ggplot2 aesthetic names and data columns (#8444)

Reviewer: I went back and looked over the more recent releases and it looks like we have been using ending punctuation throughout.

```suggestion
- RStudio's auto-completion system now supports ggplot2 aesthetic names and data columns. (#8444)
```

> - RStudio's auto-completion system now supports the display of the "label" attribute (#14242)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- RStudio's auto-completion system now supports the display of the "label" attribute. (#14242)
```

> - RStudio Desktop on Windows and Linux supports auto-hiding the menu bar (#8932)
> - RStudio Desktop on Windows and Linux supports full-screen mode via F11 (#3243)
> - RStudio Desktop now supports pasting of file paths for files copied to the clipboard (#14240)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- RStudio Desktop on Windows and Linux supports auto-hiding the menu bar. (#8932)
- RStudio Desktop on Windows and Linux supports full-screen mode via F11. (#3243)
- RStudio Desktop now supports pasting of file paths for files copied to the clipboard. (#14240)
```

Reviewer: I don't want to go through each line and add ending punctuation, so please add it throughout.

- RStudio now highlights and lints Quarto chunk options in Python code chunks
- RStudio no longer highlights `\[ \]` and `\( \)` Mathjax equations; prefer `$$ $$` and `$ $` instead (#12862)
- Added cmake option to build RStudio without the check for updates feature (#13236)
- Allow choosing R from non-standard location at startup (#14180; Windows Desktop)
- Add `EnvironmentFile` support to systemd service definitions (#13819)
- RStudio's GWT sources can now be built with JDKs > 11 (#11242)
- Show grey background instead of solid-white during Desktop startup (#13768)
- The 'restartSession()' API method gains the 'clean' argument. (#2841)
- 'dot' chunks in R Markdown documents are now executable (#14063)
- (rstudioapi) Fixed an issue where selectFile() did not parse filter strings in a cross-platform way (#13994)
- Show Quarto version information in the About dialog (#14263)
- RStudio now reports repository validation errors (if any) when adding secondary repositories in the Global Options -> Packages pane (#13842)
- The working directory of a background job now defaults to the .Rproj location when a project is open (#12600)

> - Add search results copy button and search results breadcrumbs to RStudio User Guide (#13618, #14069)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added search results copy button and search results breadcrumbs to RStudio User Guide (#13618, #14069)
```

- RStudio now supports generation of a Copilot diagnostic report from the Copilot preferences pane (#14358)
- The RStudio debugger is now better at matching debugged code to source documents (#13925)
- RStudio no longer includes spurious chunk markers from Copilot completion results (#13686)
- Added new commands which toggle the maximized state of Console, Source, and Tab Group quadrants [Accessibility] (#7022)
- RStudio now prints a warning if an overly-long line of console input is truncated when sending to R (#14420)

> - Vim: Fixed an issue where bracket highlight followed the bracket behind the cursor when in normal mode (#4152)

Reviewer: Should this go in the fixed section?

- Implemented Posit Product Documentation theme in Posit Workbench Administration Guide, Posit Workbench Licenses, Posit Workbench User Guide, and RStudio Desktop Administration Guide via Quarto extension (rstudio-pro#5729)
- Performance improvement where nginx handles static files, configurable with nginx.static.conf file (rstudio-pro#5671)
- VSCode: upgraded coder/code-server to 4.22.1 (VS Code version 1.87.2) on all operating systems except CentOS 7. Upgraded to coder/code-server 4.16.1 (VS Code version 1.80.2) on Centos 7 
- Added preview of Code OSS - with Posit Workbench, pwb-code-server version 2024.04-b31 (VS Code version 1.87.0) (rstudio-pro#3777)
- Robustness and scalability improvements for streaming connections. Close all streaming connections when tabs are invisible, and impose limits on "session output view". Added options for tuning large-scale system performance: launcher-sessions-proxy-timeout-seconds, max-streams-per-user, streaming-connection-timeout-seconds rserver.conf option.  (rstudio-pro#5888, rstudio-pro#5616, rstudio-pro#5771, rstudio-pro#3417)
- Fixed sporadic CPU usage and crash in rworkspaces (rstudio-pro#5690)

> - Fixed problem with `rstudio-server reload` changing permissions on nginx proxy/body dirs leading to user errors accessing the system (rstudio-pro#5636)

Reviewer: Should these be moved to the fixed section?

- Added support for debug, and strace session diagnostics for individual user sessions. Create a file with 'strace' or 'debug' in ~/.config/rsession-diagnostics or ~/.config/pwb/jupyter-diagnostics, vscode-diagnostics. Logs in ~/.local/share/{rstudio,pwb}/log. (rstudio-pro#5529)
- Posit Workbench no longer has a dependency on the `libuser` package (rstudio-pro#4261)
- Container users that have special characters in their names, such as `@`, can now be created at session start (rstudio-pro#2714)
- Prometheus metrics are now available as a Preview feature (rstudio-pro#5793)
- Prometheus metrics can now be enabled or disabled with `metrics-enabled=[1|0]` in `rserver.conf` (rstudio-pro#5792)
- Prometheus metrics can now be configured. For more details see [Promethes Metrics in the Workbench Admin Guide](https://docs.posit.co/ide/server-pro/2024.04.0/auditing_and_monitoring/prometheus_metrics.html) (rstudio-pro#5791)

> - Add support for automatically provisioning users when using Okta or Microsoft Entra ID as an IdP. When using this feature, users can be assigned to Workbench from the IdP and do not need to be created as POSIX users. This feature also supports migrating from local, or ldap/sssd, users to IdP provisioned users. For more details see the [User Provisioning section of the Admin Guide](https://docs.posit.co/ide/server-pro/2024.04.0/user_provisioning/user_provisioning.html) (rstudio-pro#2784)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added support for automatically provisioning users when using Okta or Microsoft Entra ID as an IdP. When using this feature, users can be assigned to Workbench from the IdP and do not need to be created as POSIX users. This feature also supports migrating from local, or ldap/sssd, users to IdP provisioned users. For more details see the [User Provisioning section of the Admin Guide](https://docs.posit.co/ide/server-pro/2024.04.0/user_provisioning/user_provisioning.html) (rstudio-pro#2784)
```

- Move the force-quit session option into the session info dialog (rstudio-pro#3385)

> - Add support for setting Posit Workbench envrionment variables at the service level in an EnvironmentFile: `/etc/default/rstudio-server` (rstudio-pro#5337)
> - Add support for Slurm with Singularity and Apptainer (rstudio-pro#5236)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added support for setting Posit Workbench envrionment variables at the service level in an EnvironmentFile: `/etc/default/rstudio-server` (rstudio-pro#5337)
- Added support for Slurm with Singularity and Apptainer (rstudio-pro#5236)
```

- Updated the Workbench JupyterLab 3 extension to v1.1.738 to upgrade NPM dependencies (rstudio-pro#5900)

### Fixed

#### RStudio

- Fixed an issue where Stage chunk and Stage line in the Review Changes UI failed in some scenarios (#5476)
- Fixed shortcut for inserting an assignment operator to work on non-US English keyboards (#12457)
- Fixed an issue where the menubar would show on secondary windows if Alt key was pressed (#13973)
- Fixed Windows installer to delete Start Menu shortcut during uninstall (#13936)
- Fixed current Git branch not always showing correctly in external editor windows (#14029)

> - Fixed tooltip to show correct keyboard shortcut when hovering over URLs in the editor (#12504)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed the tooltip to show the correct keyboard shortcut when hovering over URLs in the editor (#12504)
```

- Fixed Save As dialog on Windows not showing Save As Type field when extensions are hidden (#12965)

> - Fixed GitHub Copilot project preferences not showing correct status message (#14064)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed GitHub Copilot project preferences not showing the correct status message (#14064)
```

- Fixed an issue where Quarto chunk option completions were not displayed at the start of a comment (#14074)
- Fixed an issue where pipes containing a large number of comments were not indented correctly (#12674)
- Fixed an issue where RStudio would unnecessarily list directory contents when opening a file (#14096)
- Localize Copilot-related user interface strings into French (#14092)
- Improved highlighting of YAML chunk options for Quarto Documents (#13836)
- Removed obsolete "Use Internet Explorer library/proxy" checkbox from Packages settings (#13250)
- Improved error handling for Desktop Pro license handling (rstudio-pro#4873)

> - Fixed exception being logged when copying or cutting from editor in a separate window (#14140)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed exception being logged when copying or cutting from the editor in a separate window (#14140)
```

- Fixed an issue where RStudio's R diagnostics warned about potentially missing arguments even when disabled via preferences (#14046)
- Fixed an issue where the Visual Editor's toolbar controls were duplicated on format change (#12227)

> - Fixed regression that caused extra whitespace at bottom of some popups (#14223)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed regression that caused extra whitespace at the bottom of some popups (#14223)
```

> - Fix type dropdowns not working in dataset import when user-interface is in French (#14224)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed type dropdowns not working in dataset import when the user interface is in French (#14224)
```

- Fixed an issue where RStudio failed to retrieve help for certain S3 methods (#14232)
- Fixed a regression where the Data Viewer did not display 'variable.labels' for columns (#14265)
- Fixed an issue where autocompletion help was not properly displayed for development help topics (#14273)
- Fixed an issue where Shiny onSessionEnded callbacks could be interrupted when stopped in RStudio (#13394)
- Fixed Copyright date ranges for Release Notes and RStudio IDE User Guide (#14078)
- Fixed Copyright date ranges for Workbench Administrator and Workbench User Guide, and RStudio Desktop Pro Administration Guide (#5614)

> - Fixed mis-encoded Hunspell dictionaries (#8147)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed misencoded Hunspell dictionaries (#8147)
```

- Fixed an issue where the RStudio debugger failed to step through statements within a tryCatch() call (#14306)
- Improved responsiveness of C / C++ editor intelligence features when switching Git branches (#14320)

> - Show an error dialog if R is not found when starting RStudio Desktop on Linux and macOS (#14343)

Reviewer: Is this a fixed issue? 

```suggestion
- If R is not found when starting RStudio Desktop on Linux and macOS, RStudio Desktop shows an error dialog (#14343)
```

- An empty `rstudio-prefs.json` no longer logs spurious JSON parsing errors (rstudio-pro#4347)

> - Help pane's Next and Previous find-in-topic buttons now have meaningful accessible labels [Accessibility] (#14347)

Reviewer: Is this a fix or something new?

```suggestion
-  Fixed Help pane's Next and Previous find-in-topic buttons to have meaningful accessible labels [Accessibility] (#14347)
```

- Fixed an issue where language objects (calls, formulas) were not described in the Environment pane (#14446)
- Improved some French translations of the UI
- Fixed an issue where searches in the Help pane could fail for entries like `[<-` (#10975)
- Fixed an issue where the "Save workspace on exit" preference was ignored in some cases (#14258)
- Fixed an issue where the NEWS button in the Update Packages dialog could fail to find the package NEWS file in some cases (#12648)
- Fixed an issue where Tensorflow object completions were not generated in some contexts (#14524)

#### Posit Workbench
- Fixed an issue where Professional Driver installation could fail on macOS (rstudio-pro#5168)
- Fixed Copyright date ranges for Workbench Administrator Guide and Workbench User Guide (rstudio-pro#5865)
- Fixed low-contrast text on Workbench pages [Accessibility] (rstudio-pro#4464)
- The terminal pane of JupyterLab sessions now respects the user's default shell (rstudio-pro#5484)
- The Databricks pane now respects the `databricks-enabled=1` setting in the `rserver.conf` file even when running in legacy RStudio Server Pro mode (rstudio-pro#5695)

> - When launching sessions on Slurm, pending or failed sessions will no longer erroneously appear in the Workbench Jobs pane on the home page (rstudio-pro#4846)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed an issue where pending or failed sessions when launching Slurm sessions no longer erroneously display in the Workbench Jobs pane on the home page. (rstudio-pro#4846)
```

> - When launching sessions on Slurm, pending or failed sessions will no longer erroneously appear in the Workbench Jobs pane on the home page (rstudio-pro#4846)

Reviewer: We use "Fixed" to start each sentence and then sometimes we don't. If we are going to use it for like 97% of the entries, we should consider standardizing
